---
title: The Mental Measurement Problem
layout: post
---

**The Mental Measurement Problem:** The Frictionless Epistemology of
Conceptual Dualism

Jackson Kernion ・ UC Berkeley

# 0・Background

We can think of mental states in a how-it-feels sense, as *phenomenally* (p-) conscious: as experiency, as having a certain ineffable qualitative character. We can also think of mental states as ‘conscious’ in a how-it-works, functional sense, as *access* (a-) conscious: as available for arbitrary use within our cognitive economy, as uniquely well-positioned to directly influence one’s thoughts and behaviors.

**Conceptual dualism:** p-consciousness and a-consciousness share no a
priori connections. You can’t discover facts about access by reflecting on facts about experience, and vice versa. (Test: the conceivability of both A without P (zombies) and P without A (phenomenal overflow).)

**My View:** p-consciousness a priori requires a-consciousness.
Conceiving of a phenomenal mind already involves the conception of some kind of underlying functional structure in which various experiences are embedded/integrated and through which they bear relations to one
another.

# 1・The Mental Measurement Problem, Laid Out

### Starting Point

Imagine that some scientists are considering the hypothesis that you have bat-sonar experiences. How would we test this hypothesis? In general, what sort of evidence do we require in support of judgments about what subjects do/don’t experience? And if, by your own lights, you *don’t* enjoy bat-sonar experiences, could any ‘scientific’ evidence ever be persuade you to believe otherwise?

### Overlap Questions and Empirical Method

Under conceptual dualism, we can’t learn anything about the P/A overlap
a priori, so their pattern of co-instantiation will be discoverable only
through empirical investigation. The logical form of investigations into
overlap questions:

*Question*: What is the overlap of *F* and *G*?

*Procedure*: Observe a bunch of instances of *F* and *G* under various conditions (in the hopes of collecting a representative sample) and then inductively infer overall F/G overlap on the basis of the patterns we pick up on from observed instances.

### A Measurement Problem

Suppose we used we designed a G-meter to track G-ness by way of tracking F-ness. This G-meter would be useless in our endeavor to answer the F/G
overlap question. We’d be able to predict in advance of any observation
precisely what sort of F/G overlap we’d observe (i.e. a perfect
overlap). And we’d have ‘screened off’ any non-F Gs that we might have
encountered.

The P/A overlap question seems plagued by just such a measurement
problem. We can reliably collect data on a-consciousness using standard
‘objective’, third-personal, scientific methods. But it’s unclear
whether any such method could serve as an measure for p-consciousness.

This is *the mental measurement problem* of consciousness research: we cannot directly measure p-consciousness, but without such direct
measurement, how could we ever settle on a satisfying answer to the P/A
overlap question?

# 2・The Inner Observation Strategy

It may seem ‘obvious’ to appeal to first-personal data to overcome our
measurement problem:

> “Conscious experience is not directly observable in an experimental context, so we cannot generate data about the relationship between physical processes and experience at will. Nevertheless, we all have access to a rich source of data in our own case.” (Chalmers, Facing Up to the Hard Problem of Consciousness)

This sort of strategy has a two-step structure:

Observe P/A overlap in our own case.

Take this P/A overlap data as a guide for interpreting third-personal
data in cases for which we don’t have first-personal data.

*Standard criticism*: step 2 is founded on the unearned assumption that
one’s own mind is similar to other minds in the ways that are in
question.

*My criticism*: How does one ever establish step 1, the P/A overlap in
one’s own case?

### The Wide Nature of the mental measurement problem

The mental measurement problem is not merely restricted to ‘problem’
cases; it challenges our everyday judgments. Consider how it applies to
a *common negative experience judgement:*

-   Everyone I know reports not having bat-sonar experiences. So
    everyone I know lacks access to bat-sonar states.
-   But we can’t take lack of access as evidence for lack of experience,
    according to the reasoning behind the mental measurement problem.
-   So it looks like we can’t know whether or not everyone/any
    particular person is or isn’t having bat-sonar experiences.

But doesn’t this reasoning apply equally well in one’s own case? How do
I know that I’m not having bat-sonar experience right now, at this very
moment? So it looks like conceptual dualism will require that inner
observation of our own experience is also called into question for
precisely the same reasons it calls into question experience judgments
in ‘problem’ cases.

### Objections and Replies

**Acquaintance objection:** Perception/observation may require a
two-step process where we need to ‘interpret’ data from the senses. But
we’re *directly* acquainted with our own mental states!

*Reply*: If acquaintance is just a synonym for ‘access’ or if it entails
access, the question just becomes: Is it a priori necessary that
subjects are acquainted with their experiences? If yes, then conceptual
dualism is false. If no, the challenge remains.

**Rationality Objection:** It’s not exactly an *a priori* truth that
subjects are directly acquainted with their own experiences, but rather
subjects can’t rationally reject that they’re acquainted with their
experiences.

*Reply 1*: On the one hand, this seems to weaken the position, because
it seems to admit that one doesn’t really *know* that one is acquainted
with one’s experiences. Rather, one simply can’t help but assume that
one is acquainted. And this consequentially undermines the justification
for the judgments in question.

*Reply 2*: But the more important point is that it’s hard to see how a
failure of acquaintance would result in a lack of rationality. It’s not
irrational to get experience judgments wrong unless having an experience
a priori entails access. One is rationally criticizable if one fails to
rationally integrate all that one gas access to. But if you were not
a-conscious of some experience, it looks like you’re not being given all
the info, not even given a chance. So it’s hard to find anything
‘irrational’ about not knowing that you’re having experiences that are
unknowable.

# 3・Background Assumption Strategy

(I’m mostly skipping this for this presentation, but I’ll mention it
here in case people want to discuss it.)

Some might try to challenge the conception of science that seems to be
motivating our present concerns. Under this approach, the mental
measurement problem can be seen as an instance of a more general worry
about the ultimate groundlessness of scientific methods. But once it’s
recognized that empirical investigation, essentially, requires *some*
set of background assumptions or other, the idea that such background
assumptions stand in need of prior justification can start to look
silly. So unless we want to reject the very possibility of scientific
progress, it should be harmless to make some assumptions that get us
around the mental measurement problem.

*Reply*: This is unlike those standard cases because it stands at the
foundation of empirical inquiry. empirical assumptions are revisable,
they make epistemological ‘contact’ with reality, and reality can push
back. But the sort of background assumption in question is immune to
revision, and that’s fishy!

・・・

**The Central Point:** If conceptual dualism were right, it’d be
impossible to ever gain epistemic traction on the P/A overlap question.
The very idea getting an observational grip on p-consciousness, under
conceptual dualism, is incoherent since all observation must occur by
way of a-consciousness.

**Comments/Questions:** jacksonkernion@gmail.com
